**DIP Number:** 1  
**Title:** Accept blocks on Agreement  
**Author(s):** @fed-franz  
**Status:** Final  
**Category/Type:** Core (Consensus)  
**Creation Date:** 05-09-2023  

## Abstract
Currently, the *Ratification* loop collects `Agreement` messages until a quorum is reached (with respect to the *Second Reduction* committee); when this occurs, the node broadcasts an `AggrAgreement` message containing the aggregated signatures from the received `Agreement` messages, generates a Certificate with the same signatures, and accept the candidate block to the chain. If a valid `AggrAgreement` message is received from the network (before reaching a quorum of `Agreement` messages), the block is also accepted, using the Certificate included in the message.

This DIP proposes to have nodes accept a candidate block upon producing or receiving a single `Agreement` message instead of requiring a quorum of Agreement messages.

## Motivation
Signatures in Agreement messages match those of the Second Reduction votes, as they both sign the message `Round||Step||BlockHash`.

As such, a quorum of `Agreement` signatures is equivalent (from a consensus point of view) to a quorum of `Reduction` signatures. It is therefore possible to create a valid `AggrAgreement` message (and hence a valid block Certificate) using just a single `Agreement` message (aggregated) signature (that is, the aggregated signatures of the quorum committees). This implies that:
  - the `AggrAgreement` message can be produced without a quorum of `Agreement` messages from the Second Reduction committee members;
  - nodes can skip the Ratification phase and accept the block with a valid certificate.

Given the above, waiting for a quorum of `Agreement` messages is redundant as it does not add any additional value to the security of the protocol.

## Technical Specification
This DIP changes the Ratification phase in the following way:

 1. Instead of collecting multiple `Agreement` messages for the current round/iteration, the Ratification step ends upon receiving (or producing) a single valid `Agreement` message for the current round/iteration.
  The block Certificate is generated using the Reduction signatures included in Agreement message.
  
 2. `Agreement` messages are not signed, as they just transmit the aggregated signature of the two Reduction steps.

 3. `AggrAgreement` messages are removed from the protocol.

The behavior of the step when receiving the expected `Agreement` message should be the same as it is now when a quorum of Agreement messages is reached, except for what stated above.

Any node running the Consensus steps (regardless of being part of any committee) can collect votes and generate the `Agreement` message by aggregating a quorum of signatures from both Reduction steps.

## Backwards Compatibility
This DIP is backward-compatible. However, nodes following an outdated version of the protocol might become significantly slower than the rest of the network. This is because updated nodes will accept blocks as soon as an `Agreement` message is generated, while obsolete nodes will wait for a quorum of such messages.

## Implementation

- [rusk/#1156](https://github.com/dusk-network/rusk/pull/1156): accept blocks upon producing/receiving a single `Agreement` message

## Security Considerations
This DIP improves security by removing a redundant message (`AggrAgreement`) and a forgeable signature (in `Agreement` messages).

## Updates
- [rusk/#1201](https://github.com/dusk-network/rusk/pull/1201): transform Second Reduction into Ratification
- [rusk/#1264](https://github.com/dusk-network/rusk/pull/1264): introduce a new field in the vote signature to distinguish between First and Second Reduction signatures
- [rusk/#1831](https://github.com/dusk-network/rusk/pull/1831): Agreement loop is deprecated

-------------------




